Good morning.
Welcome to session 502,
Power Macintosh G5
System Architecture Overview.
My name is Mark Tozer-Vilches.
I am the desktop hardware
evangelist for Apple Computer.
So what do you guys think
of the Power Macintosh G5?
Awesome!
Well, great.
Steve gave a great,
exciting presentation yesterday.
Today we're going to follow
that up with a little bit more
in-depth technical information,
both about the CPU as well
as the system architecture.
So without further ado,
I'd like to introduce Mr.
Peter Sandon,
the IBM Senior Power PC Processor
Architect.
Thank you.
Thanks, Mark.
Good morning.
As Mark said,
I want to describe to you this morning
the IBM PowerPC 970 microprocessor.
Steve covered it pretty well yesterday,
but he left me a few details to fit in.
So I'm going to do that.
What I'd like to do is provide some
details that perhaps you'll find
useful in your work with the G5.
Other details I'm going to also put in
that perhaps you may not use directly,
but will take advantage of indirectly as
you use and work with the G5 processor.
So last fall I gave a high-level overview
of the 970 at the microprocessor forum,
and I'm going to start with several
slides from that presentation
to give the high-level overview.
That's the first two bullets.
Secondly, I'll go into details on the
several aspects mentioned here.
So let me start with some
key aspects of the 970.
First, this design was derived from the
high-performance Power 4 microprocessor,
which is used in IBM's
high-end server systems.
So the 970 is also a
high-performance design.
It runs at 2 gigahertz.
It executes instructions
multiple dispatch at a time,
multiple issue.
It also executes instructions out of
order to a degree that you haven't
seen in previous Power PC processors.
The 970 is a full implementation
of the 64-bit PowerPC architecture,
but is compatible with, in fact,
runs natively 32-bit code.
The G5 includes the vector enhancements
called the velocity engine,
also includes a prefetch engine
to reduce memory latency.
And finally,
the high-speed bus that Steve mentioned
yesterday to off-chip memory and
I/O runs up to 1 GHz corresponding
to 8 GB/s of peak bandwidth.
So this is a block diagram of the
970 showing its major components.
I'm going to kind of use this block
diagram as a map as we go along and
discuss the different components.
All the text surrounding
I won't go through here,
but I'll cover as we go along.
So let me start with the
instruction pipeline shown on the
left side of the block diagram.
The L1 cache is a 64 K byte L1 from
which eight instructions per cycle can
be fetched by the instruction fetch
unit and up to five instructions fed
into the instruction dispatch unit,
instruction decode unit
and then on to dispatch.
So as a group, up to five instructions
can be dispatched,
up to ten instructions per cycle can
be issued to the execution units.
And in all, over 200 instructions can be
in flight at any one time.
The data pipe shown on the
right side of the diagram starts
with the 32k byte L1D cache.
The two load store units below that
L1D cache move data between the cache
and the three register files shown there,
the FPR, GPR, and vector register file.
The two L1 caches are backed,
shown at the top, by a half meg L2 cache,
which in turn is backed by
main memory via the BIU.
and continuing same diagram.
In the middle of the diagram are
shown the memory management arrays
that support virtual memory.
This is a 64-bit implementation,
so effective addresses are 64 bits wide.
Real addresses are 42 bits wide
for a 4 terabyte memory range.
Finally, down at the bottom are the
computational execution units,
the dual fixed point,
the dual floating point,
and the dual vector units.
Along with the two load store
units that I just mentioned and the
branch and condition register unit,
which aren't shown in the diagram,
those comprise the 10 execution
units of the processor.
So what I want to do now
is repeat what I just said,
but in a little more
detail in certain areas,
and starting with instruction processing.
So this is a pipeline diagram showing how
instructions move through the processor.
Each block here represents a stage
where an instruction spends a cycle.
Instructions move through the
pipeline starting at the top where
they're fetched from the cache,
move down through decode, dispatch,
then to issue and execution,
and finally at the bottom
come out and complete.
The lower part of the diagram
shows the individual pipelines of
the individual execution units.
The upper part just represents
the movement of the instructions
through fetch and decode.
So I'm going to start at the
top with instruction fetch.
[Transcript missing]
All of the caches in the 970 are
organized as 128-byte cache lines,
but the instruction cache
lines are further subdivided
into four 32-byte sectors.
So it's a sector each cycle that gets
fetched from the instruction cache,
and therefore for maximizing performance,
it's important to align your branch
targets on these 32-byte boundaries
to maximize the fetch bandwidth.
Once the instructions are fetched,
they're put into the 32-instruction
fetch buffer shown at the bottom,
and then up to five instructions per
cycle are removed from the fetch buffer
to send off to decode and dispatch.
So the goal of this part of the
hardware is to keep that pipeline
busy below the fetch buffer.
And what could prevent that, for example,
is a miss in the ICache.
When the IFAR address is
not found in the L1 ICache,
a request goes to the L2 cache,
the data is brought back if
it's found in the L2 cache,
and the fetch stream continues.
But that stream is stopped for
12 cycles while that happens.
So when that L1 cache misoccurs,
not only does the fetch hardware
go after the missed cache line,
but it goes after the next
sequential cache line as well.
It brings it back into one of
the four prefetch buffers shown
at the top of the diagram.
So that the next time
an L1 cache misoccurs,
if that address is found
in the prefetch buffer,
there's only three cycles
missed of fetching.
Similarly, on that table at the bottom
are shown these latencies.
When a branch is taken,
predicted is taken,
the branch prediction logic
updates that IFAR register with
the new address and there's a two
cycle bubble in the fetch stream.
Of course, the point of the fetch buffer
is that as you're feeding it,
it's starting to fill up so that
when you get these two or three
cycle bubbles in the fetch stream,
you're still able to maintain the
stream of data down into decode,
the stream of instructions.
Branch processing occurs
in two places in the 970.
First, branches are predicted as they
are fetched from the cache,
and second,
they are resolved when they get
down to the branch execution unit.
"Why do branch processing?"
Steve asked yesterday.
Because particularly in a deeply
pipelined design like this,
we're always fetching
well ahead of executing.
So if you had to wait until you execute,
that is, until you know the conditions of
whether a branch will be taken or not,
you will miss opportunities
to keep the pipeline full.
So what you want to do is predict
branches early and predict them
accurately to avoid those delays.
So as instructions are
fetched from the cache,
they are scanned for branches,
and up to two branches
per cycle are predicted.
There are two branch mechanisms,
one to predict the direction a
conditional branch will take,
and that mechanism uses
three branch history tables,
which implement two different algorithms,
a local and a global, for predicting the
direction of the branch.
The second mechanism is for
predicting branches to registers.
So there's a count cache that's used to
predict branch-to-count branch targets,
and a link stack to predict
branch-to-link targets.
Each of those data structures
holds previously seen branch target
addresses for later predictions.
So, predictions are made up as
instructions are fetched.
The branch now works its way
through decode and dispatch.
It finally gets to the execution
unit and now it resolves.
That is, now it knows whether the
condition was true or false,
whether the branch should
have been taken or not.
If it predicted correctly, life goes on,
life is good.
If it predicted incorrectly,
what the branch execution unit does is
it updates the IFAR with the correct
branch target address and it flushes,
of course,
all the instructions that were behind
that branch because they now no
longer belong to the correct stream.
The delay in that case to fill the pipe
and get it going again is 12 cycles.
So it's that 12 cycle branch
penalty that one wants to avoid.
This mechanism,
this prediction mechanism over a
wide range of applications tends to
be accurate in the mid 90% range.
So perhaps one out of 20 times a
branch will be mispredicted and so very
few times will you pay the penalty.
The last bullet here simply points out
that this dynamic branch prediction
facility can be overridden by software
using an extended branch conditional
instruction in the 970 which allows the
compiler or the programmer to statically
predict that a branch should always
be predicted taken or always not taken.
Instruction decode is a
multi-stage process here.
I'm just going to mention one
aspect of instruction decode as it's
different from most previous Power PCs.
And it is as follows.
The Power PC architecture
is a RISC-type architecture,
and therefore each instruction in general
corresponds to one simple operation.
However, there are exceptions to that.
For instance,
a load with update instruction
corresponds to two simple operations,
a load of one register and update
of a separate index register.
What the 970 does is it cracks,
as we say,
that instruction into two internal ops,
and those internal ops then
flow through the pipeline.
And furthermore,
there are more complex instructions,
like load multiple,
that correspond to a sequence
of several operations.
Those are translated into
a microcoded sequence,
which then flows through the pipeline.
And finally,
finally in terms of fetch and decode,
we get to dispatch.
This corresponds to the transition from
the fetch decode to the execution stages.
It also corresponds to the transition
between in-order processing and
out-of-order processing of instructions.
So when instructions
reach the dispatch stage,
they can be dispatched as a group
of up to five instructions if all of
their hardware resources are available.
Most instruction types can
dispatch out of any of the
first four dispatch slots there.
The fifth dispatch slot is
reserved for branch instructions.
So once dispatched,
an instruction will take a place
in one of these issue queues.
All of the boxes there in the
issue queues show how many
entries can be in the issue queue.
Once in the issue queue,
an instruction can issue to be executed
if all of its operands are available.
And so if one instruction is waiting
on operands from a cache miss,
for example, other instructions behind it
can continue to be processed.
And it's this massive opportunity
for out-of-order execution of
instructions that allows the G5 to
keep processing even in the presence
of pipeline and memory delays,
which you normally run into in
the normal course of processing.
Finally, once instructions execute,
they wait until all of the instructions
in their dispatch group are finished
and they complete together in order.
Just briefly on virtual memory,
the memory management unit,
one of its main features
is the support of address
translation for virtual memory.
Now virtual memory is something that
makes the programmer's job easier,
its programming model is easier,
it makes OS implementations easier,
but it actually involves
some complexities in the
hardware to support it.
So briefly, a segmented,
paged virtual memory system like
this one requires a two-step
address translation process.
First, an effective address,
what you program in,
is mapped to a virtual
address using a segment table.
And second, a virtual address is
mapped to a real address,
what the hardware understands,
using a page table.
And what's needed to support this
two-step process and then look up in
the cache is some sort of hardware
optimization to make this efficient.
So what's implemented
here is the usual TLB,
table look-aside buffer,
which caches page table entries,
but also a segment look-aside
buffer new to the 64-bit processor.
This replaces the segment
registers of the 32-bit processors,
which caches the segment table entries.
And still, that two-stage translation
could be costly,
except that we've implemented another
level of caching of address translation.
It's called an ERAT.
That's the effective-to-real
address translation table.
It caches the most
recent effective-to-real,
the two-stage process, effective-to-real
addresses in a small cache,
small fast cache.
So what the diagram shows then
is that the effective address in
the IFAR accesses the L1 cache,
the L1 directory,
and the ERAT all at the same time.
And if all goes well,
like it usually does, and those all hit,
you get the instructions
out on the next cycle.
Similarly, there's a DERAT to go
with data cache accesses.
For data processing,
just a couple points to make.
One is on the registers.
What the programmer sees is a set
of 32 general purpose registers,
a set of 32 floating point registers,
and a set of 32 vector registers.
Those are the architected registers.
What's implemented in the
hardware to support those are
more registers for two reasons.
There's out-of-order execution and
there's multiple execution units.
So to handle out-of-order execution,
we need a place to put the results
that we've executed out-of-order
until they become the official result
and go into the architected register.
We call those rename registers,
and since there is so much
capability for out-of-order,
there are more rename registers
than architected registers.
So the 970 has 32 GPRs architected plus
48 renames for a total of 80 registers,
all 64 bits wide.
The FPR similarly, 32 architected,
48 renegades.
The vector registers similarly,
32 architected, 48 renames.
In addition, we've got multiple execution
units and to keep up the supply
of data operands to those units,
we've duplicated those register files.
So there's two exact
copies of the 80 GPRs,
two exact copies of
the FPRs and so forth.
So the 32 architected registers
we've implemented as 160 registers
for each of the register files.
The latencies at the bottom
just show load to use delays.
When you do a load of an operand
and then you want to use it,
you can issue the load and then you
have to wait some number of cycles
to issue the dependent operation.
In the case of the fixed point unit,
for example, it's three.
Floating point, it's five,
and the other values are shown there.
The second thing I want to say about
the data side is that there is a data
prefetch facility that in hardware
initiates data stream prefetching.
So the idea is that this
prefetch hardware monitors the
activity of the L1 data cache.
When it sees two misses to
two adjacent cache lines,
it says, oh, there's a pattern.
I'll go after, I'll prefetch the third
cache line in the sequence.
If it then sees a hit to
that third cache line,
it'll go after the fourth line and
prefetch it into the L1 and so forth.
So it's demand-paced,
which means it'll keep fetching ahead for
as long as the data stream is accessed.
Cache lines are brought into the L1.
and further ahead they're brought
into the L2 using this mechanism.
So in addition to this
hardware-initiated prefetch,
software can also initiate a data
stream prefetch using an extended
version of the DCB touch instruction.
The 970 supports this
extension of the DCB touch,
which allows it to touch not just
one cache line and bring it in,
but to start this prefetch
mechanism to keep fetching ahead.
And a third mechanism for prefetch
is the implementation of the data
stream touch instruction associated
with the vector extensions.
The computation units at the
bottom of the block diagram,
I just want to cover
what gets executed where.
There are two fixed point units
that are nearly symmetrical.
They both execute the usual
arithmetic and logical and shift
and rotate type instructions.
They both also execute multiplies,
so you can have two multiplies
going at the same time.
The difference is that the one
unit executes the fixed point
divides while the other unit
executes the SPR move instructions.
The two floating point
units are symmetric.
They both execute IEEE single
and double precision operations.
They both support the
IEEE formats for denorms,
not a numbers, infinities, and so forth.
They both support precise exceptions.
They also both support the
optional floating point
instructions for square root,
select, reciprocal estimate,
and reciprocal square root estimate.
They do not support a non-IEEE mode.
[Transcript missing]
And finally at the top,
the L2 and bus interface,
which will segue us
into the next segment.
The memory subsystem has a
few subcomponents itself.
The cache interface unit shown
at the top takes four types
of requests from the core.
One from the fetch
unit for iCache misses,
one from each of the load store
units for de-cache misses,
and a fourth one for the TLB hardware
table walker and the prefetch hardware.
What the CIU does is simply direct
those requests to the right place.
For instance,
an L1 iCache miss will be directed to
the L2 cache where it will be looked up.
If the data is found,
it will be returned.
If the data is not found,
the L2 cache controller will forward
it on to the BIU and on to memory.
The non-cacheable unit on the left side
simply handles all of the other activity
not associated with the L2 cache.
The G5 processor is a very powerful
and powerful tool for the iCache.
goes off to the bus.
So this high bandwidth processor bus
is what we call the elastic interface.
It consists of two buses,
two unidirectional buses,
each four bytes wide, point to point.
It's not a shared bus.
Source synchronous.
The clocks are sent with the data.
And I put in this point about
initialization alignment.
At power on reset,
there's a procedure that the processor
and system controller go through
to de-skew all of the bits on a
bus and then to center the clock
within the eye of those data bits.
And my reason for pointing this
out is to say that there's a lot of
work involved on both the processor
and the system controller side to
get a bus to run at one gigahertz.
The logical interface here supports a
pipelined out-of-order transactions.
The address and control information
shares the same bus as the data.
There are three types of command packets,
read, write, and control.
Each of those consist of two
4-byte beats on the bus that
contain the 42-bit real address,
transaction type, size,
other control information, and a tag.
Data packets come in sizes from
2 4-byte beats to 32-beats.
To send one byte on the bus requires
a 2-beat packet from 1 to 8 bytes.
The 32-beat packet is
the cache line size,
128 bytes.
On the right, the diagram shows a little
bit more detail about what
I called a four-byte wide bus.
The bus actually consists
of three segments.
One, the address data segment,
which is actually 35 bits,
the 32 of data plus some control bits.
Second, there's a transfer handshake,
single signal,
and two signals for snoop responses.
And so the outgoing,
with respect to the processor,
and ingoing buses are shown here.
Here are those three
segments per direction.
Again, just to show an example
of a read transaction.
The transaction is initiated by the
processor by putting a read command
packet up in the upper left corner
out on the address data out bus.
And I'll give the end of the story first.
Out on the other side to the
right is the data coming back
from the memory controller.
What's happening in between,
without giving a lot of detail,
is that there's handshaking going on
to acknowledge transfer of information
and also to support memory coherency.
So again, this is a point-to-point bus,
so one processor can't see directly
what the other processor is doing.
In order to maintain memory coherency,
the system controller has to get
involved and reflect commands
back to all the processors so
they can snoop and stay coherent.
And that's what you see,
some of that handshaking.
This looks like not very
good utilization of the bus.
That's because I just
isolated the read transaction.
Normally,
all of this activity would be interleaved
with all the other activity on the bus.
And the other point,
the numbering shows that there are,
the way the bus is managed is that
there are fixed delays between
activity and responses to activity.
And this is the way we correspond
the handshaking with the original
transaction because things are
happening out of order and the snoop
responses and the handshakes are
not tagged or validated in any way.
Okay, so let me just go over one
more time what I've said.
This G5 processor is a
high performance processor.
It achieves its high performance
by running at 2 gigahertz,
also by its superscalar completion
of five instructions per cycle,
by its out-of-order
execution of instructions.
It's an implementation that
supports both 64-bit and 32-bit
applications and operating systems.
I've mentioned kind of the width of
the pipeline that we can fetch eight,
dispatch five,
issue ten instructions every cycle.
Also that the branch prediction scheme
is highly accurate across a range
of applications so that we avoid
that branch penalty that I mentioned.
We get high computational throughput.
By using two fixed point,
two floating point, and two vector units,
as well as two load store units
to keep everything busy with data.
And also this data prefetch engine,
which keeps the latency to memory,
the effective latency to memory,
low by keeping things as close
in to the processor as possible.
And finally, the high-speed bus,
which I just mentioned,
on the 2 gigahertz processor will run at
1 gigahertz for an 8 gigabyte percentage.
bandwidth to off-chip memory and I/O.
So that's all I have to say.
I'd like to thank Mark and
Jesse Stein from IBM for helping
me prepare this presentation,
and I'd like to thank you for your
attention and your interest in the G5.
Thank you, Peter.
And you thought he was going
to only answer the branch
processing questions Steve had,
huh?
So to point you to some more information,
if you wanted to get some more documents
specifically from the IBM PowerPC page,
a couple of URLs here available for you.
There are several documents posted there.
Later on in the presentation,
I'll give you some more pointers to
other references on the Apple site.
So to continue our journey from
where IBM handed off the PowerPC 970,
the G5 processor,
to Apple and what we did then
with the system architecture,
I'd like to introduce to you Keith Cox,
principal engineer, systems architecture.
Thank you, Mark.
So Peter told you a little bit
about the G5 processor itself.
I'm here to tell you more about the
system we wrapped around it and how we,
our vision of bringing that
performance out and turning it
into real world performance for
your users and your applications.
So this is the general block
diagram of the Power Mac G5.
The thing I want you to get from this is
that we started over with this system.
We did not take the Power Mac G4
architecture and say,
okay, how do we tweak it?
We got to get a little faster.
What we said was, we're getting a really
cool processor from IBM.
It's going to really
chew up instructions.
It's going to really need data.
We really need to keep this sucker fed.
So we started from the ground up.
We opened up all the pipes.
So what I want you to get from my
presentation is that not only is this the
next generation Power PC architecture,
but in addition to that,
we've added high bandwidth
buses everywhere.
We've improved the memory system greatly.
We've increased the
PCI buses in the IO system.
And on top of that,
we've added an advanced thermal
management system because we know the
users like their systems to be quiet.
They don't like them to be loud and
roaring like jet airplanes or anything.
So, this is the general block
diagram of the Power Mac G5.
It's actually very similar just
in blocks to a G4 block diagram,
but there are some important
differences to note.
The first is that the processor bus is
not shared in a multiprocessor system.
That's a key difference when you get to
MP and the kind of performance that we
have and the kind of bandwidth that we
need to be able to deliver to the user.
Another important difference is that the
system controller connection to the I.O.
system is no longer a PCI bus.
It's actually a hyper transport
bus that has up to 3.2
gigabytes a second of bandwidth,
connects to high bandwidth devices
down below the system controller.
That's all new.
So if we compare the G4
and the G5 processors,
you've just heard from Peter about how
the G5 can keep a million things in
flight or at least 200 and some odd.
It runs at 2 gigahertz and can
complete five instructions at a time.
It just has a huge appetite and
it's a big leap over the G4.
The system, similarly,
we believe is a big leap over the G4.
The front side bus has six times
the bandwidth of a G4 system.
If you've got a multiprocessor system,
it actually has 12 times the
bandwidth of a G4 system.
The memory system is more than two
times faster and the PCI system
is seven times the bandwidth.
So we've really tried to open
up the inside of the system.
Let's dig down in a little
more detail on all of that.
The front side bus is
8 gigabytes per second.
We quote it as double data rate 64-bit.
As Peter was just showing you,
that's not quite correct.
It's actually a pretty
complicated bus to describe.
That's what we put in the
marketing fluff to describe it.
I mean, we really want our users to
understand the basic gist of it,
which is it's effectively
64 bits wide of data,
and it's 8 gigabytes
a second of bandwidth.
In reality, that's two 4 gigabyte
per second channels,
4 gigabytes a second going up,
4 gigabytes a second coming
down on each processor.
There's a little bit of overhead for the
packet headers and that sort of stuff.
So the real achievable bandwidth
number is a little smaller than that.
But it is close to the 8 gigabytes
per second total on that interface.
Then if you had two processors,
we've got two interfaces.
So that's a total of
16 gigabytes a second,
four up, four down,
times two processors to
get the full bandwidth.
In order to deal with that,
you really need a really high
bandwidth system controller.
This was a ground-up redesign
at Apple that really intended
to achieve these real levels
of performance and be able to
deliver these kinds of bandwidths.
In addition to just moving 16
gigabytes a second of data,
there's all the coherency protocol
that Peter was just describing where
one processor requests something,
you've got to check the other processors.
It may have it modified in the cache.
So Apple's always delivered
cache-coherent systems.
We do that here.
The G5 implements something
called cache intervention as well,
which it says that if processor
one wants a line in the cache,
processor two has it modified,
the system controller actually
delivers the data coming out of
processor two straight across and back
up to processor one without having
to go through the memory system.
What this does is it does two things.
One, it doesn't chew up your valuable
memory bandwidth if you don't need to.
The other thing is it.
It takes full advantage of the
high bandwidth of the processor
interfaces to deliver things fast to
the other processor while not really
interfering with the other processor.
Yes,
it takes a few beats of the bandwidth
for processor two to deliver the data,
but it had to do that anyway.
It had it modified.
It owned that data.
And so it cost it nothing else,
and yet we got the lower latency
and higher throughput by doing that.
In addition,
one of the points you're going to
hear throughout my talk is that
all these links are point-to-point.
We're connecting endpoints directly to
get the highest efficiency possible,
the lowest latency possible,
and really just make the data
scream through the system without
bottlenecking at any single point.
So you just heard how the G5
processors can talk directly to
each other without interacting
with any of the rest of the system.
In reality, the AGP bus has its own
direct port into memory.
The IO system through hypertransport
has a port into memory.
Each processor has their own individual
read and write cues into memory.
If you look inside the system controller,
if you could open it up,
there are actually direct point-to-point
links between all the interfaces as well.
So we've really tried to avoid any of the
bottlenecks of some system controllers.
controller designs where
things really get choked up.
If we move on to the memory system,
the first thing we did
was we doubled the width.
I mean, that's the obvious thing.
You need more bandwidth, you go wider,
you get more bandwidth.
In addition,
we pushed it up to 400 megatransfers
per second or PC3200 DRAM or
whatever label you want to apply.
This gives us a total bandwidth
of 6.4 gigabytes a second.
That's pretty much state-of-the-art.
That's the best you can do with
current memory technology without
going really extremely wide,
which starts to impact your
cost in a very negative manner.
Going 128 bits wide,
you do have to put two DIMMs wide
because each DIMM is 64 bits,
so too wide to get 128 bits.
So you have to install them in pairs.
But one thing you'll see in the
Power Mac G5 system that you don't
see anywhere else is the depth.
Our memory system is two
DIMMs wide by four DIMMs deep
at 400 megatransfers per second.
That, as far as I am aware,
is not done anywhere
else in the industry.
It's actually a great challenge to
get 400 megatransfers per second on
four DIMMs that are all connected
together to the same memory interface.
And that's one of the values that are one
of the places where Apple put a lot of
engineering to get both the memory speed,
the memory width,
and the memory depth so that we
can have the large memory system.
And the customers can get the
eight gigabytes of memory and
eight DIMMs that we support.
If we move on to the AGP system,
it's pretty much a standard AGP 8X,
AGP 3.0, all buzzword compliant or
spec compliant interface.
AGP Pro is new for us
and it's a great idea.
Our case,
we support up to 70-watt AGP cards.
The AGP Pro spec has different levels,
and at those different levels,
you can start growing your heat sink
into the slot space of the PCI cards.
So technically, at a 70-watt card,
the card vendor is allowed to
take up two of your PCI slots
with just heat sink to cool that.
So that's something to be aware of.
I don't know that there's
much more to say about that.
If we move on to the I/O system,
coming out of the system
controller is the last major bus,
which is the hyper transport bus
coming down to the PCIX bridge.
That bus, hyper transport--
describes it as a 16-bit bus.
It's really two 16-bit
point-to-point interfaces,
one each direction,
similar to the processor bus.
So you've got 16 bits up, 16 bits down,
running at 800 megatransfers per
second in our implementation.
Connected to that,
you've got a PCIX bridge with two
completely independent PCIX buses.
So the PCIX spec says
that if you have one slot,
you can run it at 133 megahertz.
If you have two slots,
you can only run it at 100 megahertz.
So that's what we did.
We needed three slots.
We had two buses.
This is the bandwidth we get.
It's seven times the 64-bit
PCI bandwidth of what we've
had in our previous systems.
So one thing you might be aware
of is on the two-slot bus,
if you plug in two cards and one of
them's slow and one of them's fast,
the bus has to run at the speed
of the slowest card so it can
handle the transactions and
understand what's going on.
So as a configuration issue,
maybe if you're designing cards and
documenting how to install them,
you should be aware that if
you've got two cards that
are fast and one that's slow,
you might actually want to put
the slow card in the single slot.
Okay.
as opposed to slowing down the other two.
Another thing to do with PCIX,
the PCIX spec drops support
for 5-volt PCI cards.
That's really just a requirement
to get the interface to run
at the speeds that it runs at.
So what happens is
there are 5-volt cards.
They're mostly very old cards.
There's not new 5-volt cards being
designed that I'm aware of or haven't
been aware of for a couple of years.
Most cards nowadays are
3.3-volt universal cards,
as they're called.
Those cards can exist on a 5-volt bus
but only signal at 3.3-volt levels.
And then, of course,
standard 3.3-volt PCI cards
also signal 3.3-volt levels.
Those two flavors,
the 3.3-volt and the universal cards,
are fully compatible with PCI-X.
The bus controller figures out
that I've got a PCI card instead
of a PCI-X card and it's capable
or it only runs at 33 megahertz,
say, and it slows down the clocks on
the bus to support that card.
Likewise, there are PCI-X cards that
only run at 100 megahertz,
so even if you plug
them into the 133 slot,
they won't run 133 because
they've reported the speed
that they're capable of.
If we move on to the I.O.
system,
it also hangs off hyper transport coming
out the far side of the PCIX bridge
is another hyper transport interface.
This one's only 8 bits wide.
That's really,
it's not 16 bits because it doesn't
need to be is the basic answer.
The 8-bit hyper transport has 1.6
gigabytes a second of bandwidth for I.O.
Historically, the I.O.
controllers had about
100 megabytes a second,
so it's only 16 times.
So it was sufficient.
We did move the gigabit Ethernet
interface and the FireWire
interface down into the I.O.
controller,
which works just fine because it now
has plenty of bandwidth to do that.
If any of you remember
the G4 block diagram,
those two functions were in the
north bridge or the system controller
in the G4 system simply because
they couldn't get enough bandwidth
off the PCI bus to exist there.
In addition, we've gone to serial ATA,
which is a higher.
It's actually roughly
equivalent to Ultra ATA 100,
but the thing is,
now you've got two of them,
and the disks are completely independent
as opposed to an Ultra ATA master-slave
where the drives really interact
horribly as far as if you're accessing
stuff off one versus the other.
You have to wait for one
before you get to the other.
Here, the drive interfaces are
completely independent,
so the drives can be run
simultaneously at full bandwidth
without beating on each other.
A note about the USB 2 controller.
I've seen lots of comments and
confusion out in the technical
community as well as the user community
about when somebody says USB 2.0,
is it really 480 megabit per
second or is it just USB 2.0?
Which label did they have?
High speed or full speed, one of those.
They're playing games with names and
saying they're USB 2.0 when they really
still only run at 12 megabits a second.
And just to be clear,
this implementation is the full
480 megabit per second USB 2.0.
Also,
we added the optical digital audio I/O.
We have customers that really like that.
Analog audio I/O in and out as usual.
This machine supports Bluetooth and
it also supports Airport Extreme.
Since as you can see,
this enclosure is basically a metal box,
it's kind of hard to get
an antenna out of that.
So there's actually ports on the rear
with small antennas that stick out that
are installable that either come with
the machine or with the Bluetooth or
Airport option when you buy it.
In addition, we put some new ports on
the front of the machine.
In addition to the headphone port,
we've added a USB port
and a FireWire 400 port.
That's really for connecting.
That's really for connecting
those digital hub type devices,
you know, when you bring your iPod
or your digital camera,
something that you plug
in and out all the time.
It's really just for convenience.
And I'm glad to hear that you
guys like it because there was
quite a bit of debate about that.
It's hard to do, believe me.
It sounds simple,
but SCC gets involved and they
like things not to interfere
with radio stations and such.
Anyhow,
now I'm going to talk a little bit
about thermal management in the system.
This is one of the places where we really
put a lot of thought and a lot of effort
and really wanted to do a good job.
Thermal management, in some sense,
is about cooling,
but it's really about noise.
It's really about you
walk into an office,
or you walk, much more important,
you walk into that bedroom or office in
your home where you've got your computer,
and if it's roaring away,
it's just a horribly noisy,
annoying thing.
We implemented sleep a few
years ago as one way to help
solve that problem because when
you put your machine to sleep,
it goes virtually silent.
For this machine,
we wanted it to be virtually
silent while running.
Now,
that's a challenge because you've got
two of these G5 processors which have
just huge amounts of processing power
and it takes electrical power to do that,
which generates heat.
You've also got PCI cards that in
some people's systems can take huge
amounts of power if they're doing video
processing and that sort of stuff.
So managing all this to a
least common denominator type
solution just would not work.
The thing would roar like an airplane.
And we knew that wasn't acceptable.
So what we've done is we've
broken the machine into
separate discrete thermal zones.
You can kind of see them coming
in the picture on the left there.
Let's start at the bottom.
That's the power supply
actually hiding under there.
It's pretty much hidden from the user.
You can't see it below this edge,
but there's actually a wall right
here in the bottom of the box.
The power supply takes in
cool air from the front and
exhausts hot air out the back.
That means it's not
preheated by the CPUs,
nor does it preheat anything else.
The power supply manages itself
and the fact that it's getting cool
air means that it does not have
to run its fans very fast to keep
all its parts within specification,
which has been a challenge
to us in the past.
If we go up to the top of the box,
that's where the optical drive is,
that's where the hard drives are.
That zone has its separate
thermal chamber as well.
Air comes in the front,
goes through the box,
and comes out the back.
In this particular case,
we have a temperature sensor mounted
up in the corner of the box that
monitors exhaust temperature constantly.
If the machine moves into a hot room,
we need to move a little more
air to keep those drives cool.
If all of a sudden you're
hitting your hard drive hard,
it's going to be putting
off an awful lot of power,
heating up the air, we see it get hotter,
we turn up the cooling
to keep that drive cool.
We maintain that zone within spec,
but only to the amount you're
using it and only to the amount
required by your environment.
So if you're in a cold room,
your machine's quieter.
If you're in a hot room,
it has to move the air a little
faster to keep the machine cool.
But as I say, it's absolutely the minimum
required to maintain the
machine in its operating state.
If you go down into the
next zone right here,
you can actually see the kind
of dip in the plastic chamber.
This guides the airflow
over the PCI cards.
So rather than all the air
running up over the top and
out the back as fast as it can,
it actually runs through the
cards between the cards and
keeps them cool individually.
Given the huge variety of placement
options and power configuration
options there are in PCI cards,
there's no way we can predict, you know,
that the slot card in slot two
is going to be hot while the
card in slot three is cool.
And we can't put a temperature
sensor anywhere to determine
how to cool that zone.
So instead,
we went to actually monitoring the
power consumed by all your cards.
So if you have a graphics
card in there and that's it,
and it's consuming very little power,
the fan's going to run
at its minimum speed,
which is quiet.
It's really quiet.
You can't hear it.
If you have a high performance
NVIDIA card or ATI card that
actually is pretty high power,
but you're not gaming right now,
you're not using that power
and it's not being consumed and
the fan still runs low speed.
If you're gaming, yeah,
the card starts to get hot,
but we just start turning up the fan
and keeping it cool just to the absolute
level required to cool the machine.
We've got lots of airflow to work with.
We don't have to work incredibly
hard to cool most of these cards.
Until you get to a
full PCI configuration,
that fan runs relatively slow.
The most complex zone in the system,
of course,
is the one that handles the G5s.
If you notice,
there's actually two fans in
the front of the box and two
fans in the rear of the box.
There's actually these two right
here and then two right back
here at the back of the box.
Now, I've been watching the
web and people are saying,
you know, with nine fans, man,
the thing's going to roar.
Well, it's actually the exact opposite.
As I've been explaining
about the other fans,
you know,
we only cool to the minimum possible
and since we don't preheat any air
going from one device to another,
everything's getting cold air so it
just takes much less air to cool it.
The CPUs have this same philosophy,
and the push-pull nature of those
fans actually let us run them
slower as well because the heat
sink has a resistance to airflow.
So as we push air through it,
if we didn't have something
pulling on the other side,
then we'd have to push harder, i.e.
we'd have to run the fan faster.
The fan pushing against that pressure
actually is what makes it make noise,
or a good portion of that noise is
actually the back pressure the fan feels.
So by putting the two fans in
the push-pull configuration
for a given amount of airflow,
we're actually much quieter than
we would be with a single fan.
In addition,
they're paired top and bottom
to match up with the CPUs.
I mean,
you can see the lines in the animation.
This fan and this fan cool
this CPU for the most part.
I mean, there is some cross coupling
and we call it one zone,
but the two pairs of fans
are controlled separately.
So say you have a multiprocessor
machine and you have one thread
that just eats the CPU and then
the other CPU is sitting idle.
We don't have to turn up
the fans on both CPUs even.
We just turn up the fans on
the CPU that's getting hot.
In addition,
The fans are controlled by the
temperature actually of the CPU.
So we're actually sensing the
temperature that's important
to keep within specification.
So we're once again cooling only
the amount required by the CPU.
This brings up another trick that
we've got in our back pocket,
which is on PowerBooks for
a few years now,
you've seen the options to run them
faster or slower or automatic switching.
Today, in the Power Mac G5,
we've added that technology to the G5.
What the 2 gigahertz machine
actually does is when you need it,
it runs 2 gigahertz.
When you don't need it,
it runs at 1.3 gigahertz or
two-thirds of its full horsepower.
Now, in reality, most of the time,
for what you're doing, that's plenty.
I mean, a 1.3 gigahertz G5 is a screamer.
But, you know,
there are people running Photoshop and
Final Cut Pro renders and all
sorts of high-end applications
that really chew on the processor.
And that performance is
fully there for them.
And it's fully there for you whenever you
need it to run your compiles or whatever.
But the thing is,
is when we can drop that
performance by that 1.3,
we can save roughly 60% of the power
consumed by the processor itself.
And when we put on all
our dynamic scaling,
we actually get down to about 1.6.
That's 1.6 of the
maximum processor power.
So when your machine's sitting
there idle in the finder,
it's consuming 1.6 of the
power that you have available
to you any time you need it.
It switches in milliseconds
and speeds back up.
And there's actually not
even a processing latency hit
to speed up and slow down.
We continue execution as we
go from 1.3 to 2 gigahertz and
then back down from 2 to 1.3.
You just slowly get faster and slowly
get slower if you don't need it.
So that allows us to save
a whole lot of power.
And then we can run the fans
incredibly slowly on the processor.
In fact, when the machine is idling,
we may end up with the fans
spinning a little bit just because,
but we don't need to turn them at all.
That's the efficiency of the cooling
system that we put into the G5 machine.
We do not actually have to spin the
fans to cool these CPUs when they're
sitting there idle in the finder.
So if you leave your machine and
you get up to go to the bathroom,
It's not doing anything.
Or you're just sitting
there staring at your mail.
It's not doing anything.
Well,
some mails take time to read and process.
Actually clicking next on your
little mail program doesn't
take any real horsepower either.
So a lot of the stuff that you do,
you know, editing source code,
for example,
doesn't take a lot of the CPU.
So when you're in that mode,
we're down at a sixth the power and
the fan's hardly spinning at all.
If at all.
So we think that's really important
and it's of real value to our users.
And one of the messages I just
want to get across is although
there's nine fans in there,
that's so we can spin them slow.
If you only have one fan,
something's probably going to be hot just
because it's been heated by everything
else as the air winds its way through the
box and all the different heat sources.
And you've got to run
it fast all the time.
And by putting all the different
fans in that control the
different zones independently
and only to as much as they need,
we can manage to keep all the fans
running slowly as much of the time as
possible and keep the whole system quiet.
So I guess in summary,
I'd just like to point out that the real
goal of the G5 architecture was to take
the G5 processor and wrap a system around
it that could allow you guys to deliver
the applications and the performance to
your users that really screams and really
makes them want to buy more computers,
really.
That's my only personal take.
But anyhow,
so what we did was we just opened
up all the pipes in the system.
We've got the high bandwidth
interfaces from the processor,
the system controller,
the system controller that
connects everything together.
And then high bandwidth memory system,
AGP interface,
and IO system to boot to deliver
everything to everybody that they need.
Thank you very much.
In terms of reference tech notes that
we've posted that went live yesterday,
there are two important ones here,
Tuning for G5, a practical guide,
and the PowerPC G5 Performance Primer.
Now, the presentation that you saw today
regarding the G5 processor from Peter and
the system architecture from Keith,
I don't want you to leave here thinking,
great,
Apple delivered this super fast system,
my application is going to run fast.
And yes, it will.
But there's a whole lot more
performance that you can achieve
out of this architecture.
And that was the goal.
The PowerPC G5 has a lot more
to offer than what you see here.
We've provided a lot of resources
at the developers conference,
online, and following the developers
conference in terms of developer
kitchens that we will have to help
you understand how to unlock that
performance in your applications.
There are several sessions that
will cover how you do that.
So I want to go and show
you just a few of those.
of those here on the roadmap.
Wednesday,
there's a session entitled "Chud
Performance Optimization Tools in
Depth." That's session 506.
Highly recommended.
If you are not profiling,
analyzing the performance
of your application,
looking at where your function
calls are spending the most time,
you are leaving a lot of
performance on the table.
You need to be at this session to
understand how to optimize your
applications for the G5 processor.
Session 507,
MacOSX High Performance Math Libraries.
Our math high performance group
has worked extensively to tune
these libraries specifically
for the G5 processor.
These are libraries that come in
MacOSX that will be available as
well in Panther as well as in Jaguar
that will give you high performance
access to arithmetic functions.
Session 304, GCC in Depth,
will talk about how using the
compiler you can set flags
appropriate for the G5 processor
to again unlock that performance.
And then finally,
throughout this whole week
and today until midnight,
we are holding a G5 optimization lab on
the first floor in the California room.
There are 40 systems set up to enable
you developers to bring and work with
our engineers on your source code
to understand exactly how to use the
tools to profile your application for
performance and what changes you need
to make to unlock that performance.
Again, one of this, the main goal of this
lab is not to sit down,
take a test drive,
see how fast these dual
processor systems work.
It's really to sit down with an
engineer and work on your code.
Later on in the week,
there is an ADC compatibility lab at
the very end of the labs on the first
floor where I'll have a system there.
If you want to take a look at
the insides and just kind of get
a feel for the system itself,
I'll have a system there for you.
But again, the lab itself is really gold
for you to work on source code,
work with our engineers.
We have engineers from IBM.
We have engineers from Apple,
several of Apple's engineering groups.
So please take advantage of that.
Again, the hours will be today,
all day through midnight, Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday, 9 a.m.
to 6 p.m.
Who to contact?
If you have questions, information,
follow-up on any of the
information that you saw today,
please contact me via email,
tozer at apple.com,
and hopefully you'll be hearing
from me shortly after the
developers conference on kitchens
specifically designed to help you,
again,
optimize your applications for the G5.
Thank you very much.
We'll start our Q&A.